---
title: about
layout: about
permalink: /about.html
# include CollectionBuilder info at bottom
credits: true
# Edit the markdown on in this file to describe your collection
# Look in _includes/feature for options to easily add features to the page
---

{% include feature/jumbotron.html objectid="col12_00014" %} 

{% include feature/nav-menu.html sections="The Formation of the Meridian Library District; The Meridian Library District-Late 1970s and 1980s; The Meridian Library District-The 1990s; The Meridian Library District-Into The 21st Century; The Meridian Library District-Moving Forward; Sources; About this Collection" %}

## The Formation of the Meridian Library District

There are two eras in the history of libraries in Meridian, Idaho. The first era covers the Meridian Occident Club and spans from 1924 to 1974. The second era covers the creation of the Meridian Library District in 1974 and continues to the present day. 

On July 17, 1924 the newly created Meridian Occident Club, a women’s civic organization committed to charity work and the betterment of Meridian, formed a library committee to establish a traveling library. In September of that year they opened a traveling library at Songer Pharmacy with only a handful of books. By 1930 the club purchased a building to hold their club meetings and to house the public library. For the next 44 years, the Occident Club maintained the library and expanded its size to meet a continually growing population (for more information on the Meridian Occident Club, visit our Meridian Occident Club digital collection). 

In May 1974, the library began a significant transformation period and entered a new era. Due to rapid population growth in Meridian and the surrounding area, the Meridian Occident Club desired to turn their library over to the Ada County Commissioners to form a library district. Previous to this time, the Occident Club regularly received money from the city of Meridian to run the library (called The Meridian Public Library), but despite this assistance more organizational power and resources were needed to respond to changing times. Two of the factors driving this desired change were first, the increasing difficulty of a volunteer organization to help run the library in the midst of a growing patronage, and second, that individuals in the expanding rural area just outside of Meridian also wanted access to a public library. 

While several individuals outside of Meridian wanted taxation in order to have access to a public library, the Occident Club created a petition to form the Meridian Free Library District (MFLD). The process was not necessarily easy. Once enough signatures were gathered supporting the move, the Ada County Commissioners needed to discuss the matter in a meeting held on July 16.  Upon deliberation, the commissioners established August 27, 1974 as the official date for the involved public to vote on whether to form the library district (“Commissioners set date for library district vote”).  The election proved successful, but in the process one library became two libraries. 

How did one library entity become two libraries? Residents within the city of Meridian were not allowed to vote in the MFLD election because they were already served by the Meridian Public Library. Only those outside of Meridian in a specified area, wanting taxation for a library, were allowed to vote. Once the election proved successful, the Occident Club agreed to provide space for the MFLD in their Club building at a rate of one dollar per year. As a result, two libraries were now in existence, the Meridian Public Library and the MFLD, both housed in the same location, 18 E. Idaho Ave (“Library Vote Bars Meridian;” “Rural Meridian Votes Approval for Library”). 

Many supporting the petition for the MFLD knew this transition would occur in this manner. It was planned from the beginning by those initiating the petition that when the MFLD formed the Meridian Public Library and the new district library should merge under one name, with both eventually becoming one united Meridian Free Library District. To secure this action another vote was necessary in which the citizens within the Meridian Public Library service area and the Meridian Free Library District needed to agree on a merger. Until this was able to occur, these two libraries operated with Grove Koger as the Meridian Free Library District librarian and Mrs. Nancy Sage as the Meridian Public Library librarian. The wheels of procedure might have taken longer than anticipated, but on August 26, 1975 the citizens of Meridian Public Library area voted to join the District (90-10), and those in the MFLD area voted (29-3) to accept the citizens of the Meridian Library District into one merged library district. Thus, the Meridian Library District started in 1974 and expanded its coverage area in the merger of 1975 (“Meridian Slates Vote on Merger Of 2 Libraries;” “Separate elections: Meridian and library-district voters ballot August 26 on merger proposal;” “Voters approve library merger”). 

## The Meridian Library District-Late 1970s and 1980s

In the years following the merger, the Meridian Library District continued forward with the same zeal of community involvement and public service. Library circulation continued to flourish with yearly circulation totals jumping significantly in its first few years. In 1977 the yearly circulation total for the library was 46,726 items, by 1978 that number increased to 53, 498 items, and by 1980 a significant 65,080 items circulated (“Meridian Free Library District 6/21/77” with Addendum Sept ‘81, MLD Scrapbook Series 5 1975-1987). Comparing this latter number to the 6,658 population figure for Meridian in 1980, this breaks down to just less than ten circulated items per person. 
{% include feature/image.html objectid="col12_00093" width="50" %} 

While humans took great interest in the library, some animals soon found the library their home. Early in MLD history, the library cared for  a pair of gerbils named Dot and Dash. In September of 1976 a three month old black and white cat adopted the library. The library staff named him Figaro, after the cat in Disney's version of Pinocchio. Adults and children alike enjoyed his presence in the community and Figaro quickly rose up to be the library's greeter and “press relations purrson.” Perhaps the only individuals weary of Figaro’s presence were Dot and Dash, whose cage was always placed in the bathroom at nighttime when the librarians went home at night. This was to keep Figaro from harassing them. Unfortunately, in December of 1980, Figaro passed away due to injuries he suffered months previous. However, his few years' presence at the library remains a memorable aspect of the library district’s history (Whitacre, May 19, 1977; MLD Scrapbook Series 5). 
{% include feature/image.html objectid="col12_00011" width="50" %} 
{% include feature/image.html objectid="col12_00010" width="50" %}

During the 1970s and 1980s the library sponsored important activities to increase child literacy and foster education. Every summer MLD held (and continues to hold to this day) a Summer Reading Program for when children are out of school for the summer. Librarians also put on weekly children’s activities with special guests such as magicians, a smokejumper, and a lesson on lassoing by Myla Meiers, a Caldwell Night Rodeo champion. On January 19, 1982, MLD initiated a storytime for preschoolers. Of the event librarian Gaye Walter declared, “We hope this program for pre-schoolers will become a weekly event.” (“Meridian library to hold story hour”). The hope was realized. To this day, MLD continues to hold storytimes as one of their most attended and popular activities. 
{% include feature/image.html objectid="col12_00063" width="50" %}

In March of 1984, the library participated in Janeen Brady’s Safety Kids program. Janeen Brady, a co-founder of Brite Music Enterprises, created a program full of songs to teach children important principles of safety such as never talking to strangers, use of the Buddy System, and knowing their telephone number. It even touched on sensitive topics like staying away from drugs and the prevention of child abuse and sexual assault. Boise mother Dee Paternoster, inspired by the Safety Kids program, coordinated a series of live presentations at libraries across the Treasure Valley in which eight children, including four of her own, acted out safety through song and dance. The Friends of the Meridian Library sponsored the Safety Kids program in Meridian. Children and Parents showed up in large numbers, as it became one of the most attended library events of 1984 (Stoffer, February 29, 1984). 
{% include feature/image.html objectid="col12_00094" width="50" %}
In the summer of 1984, MLD joined in registration for the USA Reading Team as part of their annual summer reading program. Team USA Reading adopted a “Go For the Gold” theme in connection with the upcoming Summer Olympics in Los Angeles. Not only were children to record the books they read during the seven week program, but the library put on a weekly event in which a program on fitness or various sports were held (“Meridian Library to have reading team”). 
{% include feature/image.html objectid="col12_00118" width="50" %}
{% include feature/image.html objectid="col12_00124" width="50" %}

MLD also expanded their collections and services to benefit adults in the community. In May of 1982, the library dedicated the Nancy S. Sage and Carl H. Rathjen Idaho Collection, named after Sage, who was a longtime librarian in Meridian, and Carl Rathjen who served on the original MLD city library board and was a popular local author with sixteen novels and various short stories. True to its name, the Idaho Collection housed books that took place in Idaho, were about Idaho, or were written by Idaho authors. The collection even included many out of print publications, likely contributing to the delight of older patrons. Apart from additional books, adults also participated in events tailored toward their age demographic. Such programs in the 1980s included classes on home canning, freezing garden grown items, and money and time saving strategies for the holidays. 
{% include feature/image.html objectid="00025" width="50" %}

As both Meridian and MLD grew in the 1980s, several construction projects became necessary. In a groundbreaking ceremony held in April 1984 the Meridian Library District initiated a $50,000 building expansion project. The most recently completed expansion had been just ten years earlier in 1974, just before the Occident Club pushed for a library district. Highlights of the 1984 expansion included 800 square feet of additional space with tables and a reference area for adult patrons, 800 square feet of existing space newly designated for children (including a life sized teddy bear), and new carpeting throughout the whole building. Overall, the library increased in size by forty percent (Guthertz, July 11, 1984). 
{% include feature/image.html objectid="00102" width="50" %}
The construction that began in April 1984 and finished months later was only Phase I of a much larger project. In the Fall of 1984, the library announced a need for $100,000 in additional funding to continue work on updating the library building. The additional money sought would be used to redesign the roof, provide more insulation in the walls, replace windows with insulated glass, improve and fix the electrical system, and construct a new library entrance among other featured improvements (Mattoon, October 3, 1984). Eventually, the Meridian Library District received $54,000 in funds from a Library Services and Construction Act, while additional local matching funds were provided to help the Meridian Library begin construction in the Spring of 1986. (“Library receives $112,900 low bid”). The newly remodeled library was dedicated in October of that year. 


## The Meridian Library District-The 1990s
MLD continued to grow throughout the 1990s, responding to both the increasing population and the rise of new technology. The library increased its number of computers, saw the introduction of the internet to patrons, as well as computerized the card catalog. Later in the decade, a completely new library was built and dedicated in order to better serve the residents of Meridian, Idaho. 

In the early 1990s, MLD continued to use a card catalog system with physical cards indicating the information for each library book and where it was located. In March of 1994, MLD Director Patty Younger sought to bring the library into the future. Younger, addressing the Library Board said that the library, “sent the cards to Nichols Software in Minnesota to be put on tape to load in a MARC record format.” Using this format and a particular computer software, the end result was to initiate an electronic card catalog for the library (Meridian Library Working Toward Computerization of all Holdings”). Months later, MLD closed down its operations for several days so the card catalog system could be converted into a $41,000 computer automation system. The system that MLD obtained included the benefit of an automated check-out procedure along with the online catalog. At the time of MLD’s switch to an online catalog, their inventory contained 42,000 books all of which could now be searched by patrons at a computer station (McCormick, August 19, 1994). 

In 1995 MLD moved forward on another vision for the future, a new and larger library. A $2.6 million bond election was set for February 7th, the bond money being desired for the acquisition of property and construction of a 26,000 square foot library. The current library on Idaho St. was only 4,500 square feet and had the daunting task of accommodating 11,000 registered borrowers. The bond election in February fell short of the two-thirds majority needed (283 yes-269 no). MLD library director Patty Younger was not deterred after the failed bond, pursuing another bond vote for that November. She declared, “We only had a simple majority, but next time we’ll get the two thirds” (Johncox, April 22, 1995; “Meridian Library bond falls short of the needed ⅔ majority”). 

One beneficial outcome of the initial bond failure was the inspiration for locals to organize a Friends of the Meridian Library group. While a similar named volunteer organization was around the previous decade, volunteer support on behalf of the library became dramatically necessary due to overcrowding and several Meridian residents stepped up to provide support. Betsy Buckley, Pam Wood and several others reestablished the Friends of the Meridian Library to educate voters to pass the library bond in November. Betsy Buckley, who regularly brought her three children to the library told the Idaho Statesman, “Particularly around closing time, there’s always a line to check out books. The checkout line is right in front of the door, so it can be hard to get in.” She continued, “It’s a very small building, and it’s just filled to capacity” (Johncox, April 22, 1995). The impact of the Friends of the Meridian Library cannot be overstated. While the February bond was set for only $2.6 million, the November bond was set for $3.4 million. On November 7, 1995 a record turnout for a library bond vote occurred with dramatic support. Out of the 2,634 votes, the margin of passage was 77.6 percent to 22.4 percent, well above the required two-thirds majority (1,836 yes-528 no). Considering the new library was set to be 30,000 square feet with a children’s section to be as large as the size of the original library, the 1995 library bond is easily one of the most significant bond elections in MLD history (Johncox, November 8, 1995). 

The new library, referred to as the Cherry Lane Branch, was to be built at 1323 W. Cherry Lane, not far from the original library. The site of the library held special significance, as a longtime resident of Meridian agreed to sell it to help the town she loved. Anna Dunten Koskela lived on the new library property for 55 years, and her and her husband, Jerald Dunten, raised four children on the farm. Despite the memories, Anna was ready to leave and saw the library’s offer as a great opportunity. She told the Valley News, “I feel happy to be able to help my town that I have lived in all my life” (Dunten Koskela, April 25, 1996). Anna Dunten Koskela’s spirit to provide the town with a library able to meet the needs of the whole community matched the zeal of the women of the Occident Club who started the first library in 1924 and kept it going until they turned the library into a library district. Residents of Meridian, for 100 years at the time of this writing, have seen the benefit of a library and prioritized access to a library for all community patrons. The Meridian Library District is cognizant and grateful of this reality, and thankful for the community that has acknowledged their public service with gratitude. 

On May 20, 1996 a groundbreaking event occurred for the Cherry Lane Library. Although construction was expected to begin soon after, it was delayed as building permit paperwork was processed. In July of 1996 construction finally began and the library held to its original May 1997 scheduled opening (Johncox, July 12, 1996). On May 16, 1997 residents of Meridian gathered for the Cherry Lane Library dedication, as Library Director Patty Younger and Idaho Governor Phil Batt cut the ribbon. After the ribbon cutting, patrons were able to walk through the library as snacks were enjoyed, children played games on the library computers, and performances by Meridian High School’s Jazz Choir,  String Quartet, and Jazz Band were held. In less than a month after the Cherry Lane Library opened, MLD saw its number of patrons quadruple with an average daily attendance of 1,200 patrons (“Meridian Public Library quadruples its patrons”). With the Cherry Lane Library officially opened, the Meridian Library District was ready to assist Meridian residents into the 21st century. 
{% include feature/image.html objectid="00161" width="50" %}
{% include feature/image.html objectid="00185" width="50" %}

## The Meridian Library District-Into The 21st Century
The Meridian Library District hit the ground running in the 21st century, continuing to promote literacy and reading among families and expanding programs to focus on teenagers. Additional priorities included providing greater library access to the community and providing patrons with a wide range of growing technological services. Significant library moments include the obtaining of a Bookmobile, the opening of new branch buildings, becoming a national award winning library, and taking over the History Center for the Meridian Historical Society. 

The community also took note of the work of MLD’s innovative librarians in promoting the fun of reading. In the 2000s, MLD librarians took innovative turns in promoting child literacy and education and in crafting more programs to get teens involved with the library. The creativity of the library district caught the attention of the community and many memorable moments transpired in child and youth services. In 2004, librarian Jillian Subach went as far as to accept eating a worm if child patrons read more than 7,000 hours over the summer. In July of that year, Subach had to follow through on her promise as 250 kids chanted “Eat the worm!” (Simnitt, August 10, 2004). In an effort to specifically introduce more boys into the joys of reading, the MLD Youth Services Department began holding a “Guys Read” program. The desired goal of the program was to allow boys to spend time with their fathers and other male role models while learning that reading can be fun and provide lifetime success. In April 2007, 120 boys and men attended the second annual event, with representatives from the Meridian Boys and Girls Club, The Meridian Police Department, and Micron Technology. CEO Steve Appleton discussed his enjoyment of using a powered paraglider, the Meridian Police Department described the work of drug sniffing dogs, and the Boys and Girls Club director Joey Schueler taught the importance of reading (Smith, April 30, 2007). In 2013, the library turned to technology as a way to help create programs that teenagers in the community wanted. Cooperating with the Idaho Commission for Libraries, MLD participated in “Teen Make It Thursday” a pilot program that taught youth how to use 3-D printers, learn robotics, and craft video game characters (Beech, December 13, 2013). These are but a few examples of the innovation MLD librarians contributed in an effort for child literacy, education, and engagement. 

The success of various MLD initiatives and programs, and the continued rapid growth of Meridian, meant that the library district needed to help expand its services to even more patrons. In the Fall of 2003, MLD purchased a bus to transform into a bookmobile. The idea behind the purchase was for MLD to reach residents who lacked the physical ability to get to one of the two current library branches. The 28-foot bus was purchased through book sales and MLD budgeting, and was designed to hold up to 8,000 books. In the beginning of 2004 the Bookmobile started bringing remote access to the community, with MLD specifically visiting areas they surveyed to establish the greatest need (Kreller, October 29, 2003). 

While the bookmobile helped bring the library into different neighborhoods, MLD continued over the years to expand into different physical branches. In 2009, MLD leased space near Overland and Eagle Road at Silverstone Point for a brand new branch. On March 27, the Silverstone Branch was dedicated and opened to the public, with 4,500 square feet of space to provide residents in that part of Meridian library resources. At the grand opening, Silverstone held over 12,000 books and audiovisual materials and 16 internet connected computers (Estrella, March 20, 2009;  “Meridian Library opens Silverstone branch,” March 30, 2009). 

Over the following years, as MLD offered 3-D printing and technology classes, the idea for a specific library location dedicated to innovative technology and business developed. In October 2015, MLD leased a building and opened the unBound branch at 713 N. Main Street. Over the next three years, 35,000 visitors interacted with the unBound branch to access modern technology to grow and support their businesses and side hustles. In 2019, unBound closed down its original space to make room for downtown Meridian’s Old Town Lofts development, but purchased a new 3,700 square foot, two-story building blocks away at 722 E 2nd Street. On April 19, 2021, after design work and construction, the new unBound location was opened to the public. It should be noted that the U.S. Bank Foundation, Idaho Community Foundation, TDS Fiber, First Interstate Bank and individual donations, along with levy funds, helped make unBound a reality for Meridian. The new unBound building continues to allow patrons access to 3-D printers, wood engraving machines, a sound studio for recording podcasts, and meeting rooms for business meetings. Every month unBound also holds a Drop-In Networking Breakfast event, in which like-minded entrepreneurs, creative thinkers, and local professionals can connect with each other. The unBound Branch of the MLD is just another example of how libraries can greatly enhance the lives of adults as well as children.

While unBound was in the process of relocating, MLD completed a project of significant magnitude called “Tiny Library,” and opened the edifice in October 2018. Don’t let the name fool you, as MLD’s Tiny Library branch was a momentous and innovative endeavor. MLD repurposed a 320 square-foot shipping container and turned it into an early literacy focused library, making a great impact on the community. The motivation behind the action was two-fold. First, at the time, Idaho was one of four states in the nation that did not fund preschool nor was kindergarten attendance mandatory. In light of this, MLD wanted to address the literacy needs of children from newborn to the age of five. The second motivation was that voters had twice declined to support a full sized branch by a supermajority vote. If a large goal could not be accomplished, then maybe a tiny goal could be accomplished? 

Seeing the need for supporting early literacy while realizing cost was an issue, the popular tiny-house movement inspired the library. MLD realized they could build a small library from a shipping container and received help from a Meridian Community Recycling Fund grant. The action was within the library’s grasp and did not depend on a levy or a bond to accomplish it. However, the shipping container could not just go on a random lot, but needed more community support. Thus, in an effort to create a campus dedicated to education, recreation, and health in Meridian, the YMCA, the Meridian Parks and Recreation Department, the West Ada School District and St Luke’s Medical Center created a location with an elementary school, a YMCA, a medical center and a park, and MLD joined into the endeavor with their Tiny Library. (Snelson, September 3, 2019; Miller, October 4, 2018)  

Today Tiny Library continues to help children get ready for kindergarten with a rotating collection of materials and activities focused on the early learning practices of talking, playing, singing, reading, and writing. Families can also check out early literacy kits tailored to different ages. Parents and teachers will also find other useful resources in their efforts to help children in their literacy development. Of a particular note, Tiny Library also made an impact outside of Meridian. Shortly after Tiny Library opened, MLD was awarded the 2018 Future of Libraries Fellowship from the American Library Association’s Center for the Future of Libraries. MLD used the award to create a toolkit with valuable information so other communities can develop their own versions of the Tiny Library (Snelson). 

In 2019, the Meridian Library District became a national award winning library, twice. On May 7, 2019 the Institute of Museum and Library Services announced that the Meridian Library District was one of ten recipients of the 2019 National Medal for Museum and Library Service. The award is presented to libraries and museums that do outstanding service in their communities. Following this award, the national Library of Congress awarded MLD as one of its 2019 honorees for “Innovative Programs Through Libraries.” (“2019 National Medal for Museum and Library Service;” “Library of Congress Literacy Awards: 2019 Winners and Honorees”). 

After starting a new century with innovations such as unBound and Tiny Library, in 2021 MLD shifted their paradigm with a fresh set of eyes to the past. In that year, care of the Meridian History Collection transferred from the former Meridian Historical Society to MLD. With both the control and charge of the History Center, MLD continues to furnish a self-guided Meridian History tour (currently located in Meridian City Hall) as well as putting staff hours into digitizing Meridian historical collections in an effort to preserve, document, and make available the history and culture of the area. Since 2022, an MLD digitization technician has worked on the digitization of history and the creation of digital collection websites (such as the one you are looking at right now) in order for Meridian residents to have access to their town’s history. Apart from keeping up self-guided history tours, and websites, the MLD History Center also participates in a monthly Digitize Family History program, in which individuals can bring in family pictures and documents to scan for preservation with the aid of a staff member. 

Much as the past guides the present, MLD continues to look forward to the future. In May of 2023, MLD opened its Orchard Park Branch (1268 W. Orchard Park), a 15,000 square-foot library with a drive up book return, a 24 hour access point for requested library materials patrons can pick up at their own convenience, a sensory room with gentle lighting and tactile installations to support sensory processing needs as well as a window looking into an adjacent room so individuals needing a break from group environments can still hear events. Orchard Park also has an adaptable learning lab to support not only literacy but STEAM (Science, Technology, Engineering, Arts, and Mathematics) for all ages. 

While in development, it is anticipated that by the end of 2024 the Silverstone Branch will relocate itself to a new larger library building in the Pinnacle community near Lake Hazel and Locust Grove roads in South Meridian. At this point Silverstone will be referred to as the South Branch. Features of the new branch will include a 24 hour access point for requested library materials placed on hold for patrons, reservable spaces including a community room, a children’s area with outdoor seating options, a designated teen space, and an adult lounge with a fireplace. MLD’s neighbors will include a coffee shop next door and an amphitheater across the courtyard.

## The Meridian Library District-Moving Forward
As 2024 marks the 100th year of a library in Meridian, Idaho and the 50th anniversary of the Meridian Library District, the national award winning MLD continues to move forward. MLD librarians and staff continue to be passionate about their service to a large and diverse group of patrons, especially as the city of Meridian continues to grow. MLD staff are happy to continue to serve the community in areas of literacy, technology, business, and the preservation and access to Meridian’s history. We look forward to the next 100 years. 

## Sources

## About This Collection
This digital collection has been created using scrapbooks and other materials preserved and archived by the Meridian Library District. The initial launch of this digital collection occurred in 2024 in celebration of the 100th anniversary of the first library in Meridian, Idaho and the 50th anniversary of the Meridian Library District. This item is protected by copyright and/or related rights. To request permission for educational, commercial, or other uses, contact the History Center at history@mld.org or 208-888-4451, ext. 1023 for further information. The Meridian Library District is not liable for any violations of the law by users.
